New blogpost about GCP Batch (#91)
nextflow-io/website: content/blog/2023/nextflow-with-gbatch.md

We will walk you through the entire process, from setting up your Google Cloud account and installing Nextflow to running an RNAseq pipeline and interpreting the results. By the end of this tutorial, you will have a solid understanding of how to use Nextflow and Google Cloud Batch for RNAseq analysis. So let's get started!

### Setting up Google Cloud CLI (gcloud)

In this tutorial, you will learn how to use the gcloud command-line interface to interact with the Google Cloud Platform and set up your Google Cloud account for use with Nextflow. If you do not already have gcloud installed, you can follow the instructions [here](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install) to install it. Once you have gcloud installed, run the command `gcloud init` to initialize the CLI. You will be prompted to choose an existing project to work on or create a new one. For the purpose of this tutorial, we will create a new project. Name your project "my-rnaseq-pipeline". There may be a lot of information displayed on the screen after running this command, but you can ignore it for now.

### Setting up Batch and Storage in Google Cloud Platform

#### Enable Google Batch

> According to the [official Google documentation](https://cloud.google.com/batch/docs/get-started), "Batch is a fully managed service that lets you schedule, queue, and execute [batch processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Batch_processing) workloads on Compute Engine virtual machine (VM) instances. Batch provisions resources and manages capacity on your behalf, allowing your batch workloads to run at scale."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to the [official Google documentation](https://cloud.google.com/batch/docs/get-started) *Batch is a fully managed service that lets you schedule, queue, and execute [batch processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Batch_processing) workloads on Compute Engine virtual machine (VM) instances. Batch provisions resources and manages capacity on your behalf, allowing your batch workloads to run at scale*.
```

The `process` scope tells Nextflow to run all the processes (steps) of your pipeline on Google Batch and to use the `nextflow/rnaseq-nf` Docker image hosted on DockerHub (default) for all processes. Also, the error strategy will automatically retry any failed tasks with exit code 14, which is the exit code for spot instances that were reclaimed.

The `google` scope is specific to Google Cloud. You need to provide the project id (don't provide the project name, it won't work!), and a Google Cloud location (leave it as above if you're not sure of what to put). In the example above, spot instances are also requested (more info about spot instances [here](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/google.html#spot-instances)), which are cheaper instances that, as a drawback, can be reclaimed at any time if resources are needed by the cloud provider. Based on what we have seen so far, the `nextflow.config` file should contain "rnaseq-nxf" as the project id.

Use the command below to authenticate with Google Cloud Platform. Nextflow will use this account by default when you run a pipeline.

```bash
$ gcloud auth application-default login
```

#### Launch the pipeline!

> With that done, you’re now ready to run the proof-of-concept RNAseq Nextflow pipeline. Instead of asking you to download it, or copy-paste something into a script file, you can simply provide the GitHub URL of the RNAseq pipeline mentioned at the beginning of this tutorial ([https://github.com/nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf](https://github.com/nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf)), and Nextflow will do all the heavy lifting for you. This pipeline comes with test data bundled with it, and for more information about it and how it was developed, you can check the public training material developed by Seqera Labs at [https://training.seqera.io/](https://training.seqera.io/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With that done, you’re now ready to run the proof-of-concept RNAseq Nextflow pipeline. Instead of asking you to download it, or copy-paste something into a script file, you can simply provide the GitHub URL of the RNAseq pipeline mentioned at the beginning of [this tutorial](https://github.com/nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf), and Nextflow will do all the heavy lifting for you. This pipeline comes with test data bundled with it, and for more information about it and how it was developed, you can check the public training material developed by Seqera Labs at [https://training.seqera.io/](https://training.seqera.io/).
```

```bash
$ gcloud storage buckets create gs://rnaseq-pipeline-bckt
```

Now it's time for Nextflow to join the party! 🥳

### Setting up Nextflow to make use of Batch and Storage

#### Write the configuration file

Here you will set up a simple RNAseq pipeline with Nextflow to be run entirely on Google Cloud Platform (GCP) directly from your local machine.

Start by creating a folder for your project on your local machine, such as “rnaseq-example”. It's important to mention that you can also go fully cloud and use a Virtual Machine for everything we will do here locally.

Inside the folder that you created for the project, create a file named `nextflow.config` with the following content (remember to replace PROJECT-ID with the project id you created above):

```Nextflow
workDir = 'gs://rnaseq-pipeline-bckt/scratch'

process {
  executor = 'google-batch'
  container = 'nextflow/rnaseq-nf'
  errorStrategy = { task.exitStatus==14 ? 'retry' : 'terminate' }
  maxRetries = 5
}

google {
  project = 'PROJECT-ID'
  location = 'us-central1'
  batch.spot = true
}
```

> The first part of the config file (the `process` scope) tells Nextflow to run all the processes (steps) of your pipeline on Google Batch and to use the `nextflow/rnaseq-nf` Docker image hosted on DockerHub (default) for all processes. Also, the error strategy will automatically retry any failed tasks with exit code 14, which is the exit code for spot instances that were reclaimed.
> 
> The second part of the config file (the `google` scope) is specific to Google Cloud. You need to provide the project id (don't provide the project name, it won't work!), and a Google Cloud location (leave it as above if you're not sure of what to put). In the example above, spot instances are also requested (more info about spot instances [here](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/google.html#spot-instances)), which are cheaper instances that, as a drawback, can be reclaimed at any time if resources are needed by the cloud provider. Based on what we have seen so far, the `nextflow.config` file should contain "rnaseq-nxf" as the project id.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `workDir` option tells Nextflow to use the bucket you created as the work directory. Nextflow will use this directory to stage our input data and store intermediate and final data. Nextflow does not allow you to use the root directory of a bucket as the work directory -- it must be a subdirectory instead. Using a subdirectory is also just a good practice.

The `process` scope tells Nextflow to run all the processes (steps) of your pipeline on Google Batch and to use the `nextflow/rnaseq-nf` Docker image hosted on DockerHub (default) for all processes. Also, the error strategy will automatically retry any failed tasks with exit code 14, which is the exit code for spot instances that were reclaimed.

The `google` scope is specific to Google Cloud. You need to provide the project id (don't provide the project name, it won't work!), and a Google Cloud location (leave it as above if you're not sure of what to put). In the example above, spot instances are also requested (more info about spot instances [here](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/google.html#spot-instances)), which are cheaper instances that, as a drawback, can be reclaimed at any time if resources are needed by the cloud provider. Based on what we have seen so far, the `nextflow.config` file should contain "rnaseq-nxf" as the project id.
```

    fastqc_ch = FASTQC(read_pairs_ch)
    MULTIQC(quant_ch.mix(fastqc_ch).collect())
}

workflow.onComplete {
    log.info ( workflow.success ? "\nDone! Open the following report in your browser --> $params.outdir/multiqc_report.html\n" : "Oops .. something went wrong" )
}
```

#### Download the input data

Create a folder named `data` in your project folder and download the example files (also taken from the Seqera training material).

```bash
$ mkdir data; cd data
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/seqeralabs/nf-training-public/master/nf-training/data/ggal/gut_1.fq
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/seqeralabs/nf-training-public/master/nf-training/data/ggal/gut_2.fq
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/seqeralabs/nf-training-public/master/nf-training/data/ggal/transcriptome.fa
$ cd ..
```

Files can also be uploaded directly to Google Cloud Storage, or downloaded directly from GitHub, depending on your own preferences.

Use the command below to authenticate with Google Cloud Platform. Nextflow will use this account by default when you run a pipeline.

```bash
$ gcloud auth application-default login
```

#### Launch the pipeline!

> With that done, you’re now ready to run the example Nextflow pipeline. Remember the name of the bucket you created? You need to set it so that Nextflow can move our input data there and store intermediate and final data. Nextflow does not allow you to use the root directory of a bucket as the work directory -- it must be a subdirectory instead. Using a subdirectory is also just a good practice. If you remember when we wrote our `nextflow.config` file above, you probably noticed it was set there with `workDir`, but it could also be set in the command-line with the `-w` parameter. Because it is already in the `nextflow.config` file, we can launch our pipeline with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With that done, you’re now ready to run the example Nextflow pipeline:
```

```bash
$ nextflow run main.nf
```

While the pipeline stores everything in the bucket, our example pipeline will also download the final outputs to a local directory called `results`, because of how the `publishDir` directive was specified in the `main.nf` script. If you want to avoid the egress cost associated with downloading data from a bucket, you can change the `publishDir` to another bucket directory, e.g. `gs://rnaseq-pipeline-bckt/results`.

In your terminal, you should see something like this:

> ![Nextflow ongoing run on Google Cloud Batch](/img/ongoing-nxf-gbatch.png)

Reviewer 2: Whoops, looks like this image needs to be updated to reflect the new launch command

Author: Good point!

### Running an RNAseq pipeline with Google Cloud Batch

Welcome to our RNAseq tutorial using Nextflow and Google Cloud Batch! RNAseq is a powerful technique for studying gene expression and is widely used in a variety of fields, including genomics, transcriptomics, and epigenomics. In this tutorial, we will show you how to use Nextflow, a popular workflow management tool, to perform an RNAseq analysis on Google Cloud Batch, a scalable cloud-based computing platform.

> Nextflow allows you to easily develop, execute, and scale complex pipelines on any infrastructure, including the cloud. Google Cloud Batch enables you to run batch workloads on Google Cloud Platform (GCP), with the ability to scale up or down as needed. Together, Nextflow and Google Cloud Batch provide a powerful and flexible solution for RNAseq analysis.

Reviewer: it's worth to point out that's a proof-of-concept RNAseq pipeline. For a real one they should look at https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq

The `process` scope tells Nextflow to run all the processes (steps) of your pipeline on Google Batch and to use the `nextflow/rnaseq-nf` Docker image hosted on DockerHub (default) for all processes. Also, the error strategy will automatically retry any failed tasks with exit code 14, which is the exit code for spot instances that were reclaimed.

The `google` scope is specific to Google Cloud. You need to provide the project id (don't provide the project name, it won't work!), and a Google Cloud location (leave it as above if you're not sure of what to put). In the example above, spot instances are also requested (more info about spot instances [here](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/google.html#spot-instances)), which are cheaper instances that, as a drawback, can be reclaimed at any time if resources are needed by the cloud provider. Based on what we have seen so far, the `nextflow.config` file should contain "rnaseq-nxf" as the project id.

#### Write your Nextflow pipeline

> With that done, it's time to write your Nextflow pipeline. The example below is a proof of concept RNAseq pipeline. More information about this pipeline and where this came from can be found in the public training material developed by Seqera Labs at [https://training.seqera.io/](https://training.seqera.io/). Copy the script below and save it as `main.nf` in the same folder as your nextflow.config file:

Reviewer: Think we user should not be asked to copy & paste the pipeline file, but just run it using the GitHub URL. that's one of coolest thing of nextflow.

Author: I agree this is a nice feature to show, but then this would require the user to provide the `nextflow.config` file with `nextflow -c nextflow.config run nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf`. Are you cool with that?

Reviewer: Yeah, also this works 

```
nextflow run nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf -c nextflow.config 
```

Author: Done, Paolo! 😄

### Setting up Batch and Storage in Google Cloud Platform

#### Enable Google Batch

According to the [official Google documentation](https://cloud.google.com/batch/docs/get-started), "Batch is a fully managed service that lets you schedule, queue, and execute [batch processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Batch_processing) workloads on Compute Engine virtual machine (VM) instances. Batch provisions resources and manages capacity on your behalf, allowing your batch workloads to run at scale."

If you're using macOS, the first step is to download the `beta` command group. You can do this by executing:

```bash
$ gcloud components install beta

> ```

Author: According to Hatem, I shouldn't have to do that, but I have to so in my machine so I assumed it's specific to macOS 😅

Then, enable billing for this project. You will first need to get your account id with

```bash
$ gcloud beta billing accounts list

> ```

Reviewer 2: Nitpicking point, but I think you're supposed to use `console` instead of `bash` if you include the `$`.

Author: I have followed what other blog posts around here do 😬 Not sure what's the correct way. Does it really matter? 👀

Reviewer 2: No, not really

#### Write the configuration file

Here you will set up a simple RNAseq pipeline with Nextflow to be run entirely on Google Cloud Platform (GCP) directly from your local machine.

Start by creating a folder for your project on your local machine, such as “rnaseq-example”. It's important to mention that you can also go fully cloud and use a Virtual Machine for everything we will do here locally.

Inside the folder that you created for the project, create a file named `nextflow.config` with the following content (remember to replace PROJECT-ID with the project id you created above):

```Nextflow
process {
  executor = 'google-batch'
  container = 'nextflow/rnaseq-nf'
  errorStrategy = { task.exitStatus==14 ? 'retry' : 'terminate' }
  maxRetries = 5
}

google {
  project = 'PROJECT-ID'
  location = 'us-central1'
  batch.spot = true
}
```

The first part of the config file (the process block) tells Nextflow to run all the processes (steps) of your pipeline on Google Batch and to use the rnaseq-nf docker image hosted on DockerHub (default) under the nextflow namespace for all processes. Also, depending on any errors you may run into, the maximum number of retries for a failed process.

> The second part of the config file is specific to Google Cloud. You need to provide the project-id (don't provide the project name, it won't work!!!), and a Google Cloud location (leave it as above if you're not sure of what to put). In this case, In the example above, spot instances are also requested (more info about spot instances [here](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/google.html#spot-instances)), which are cheaper instances that, as a drawback, can be reclaimed at any time if resources are needed by the cloud provider.  Based on what we have seen so far, the `nextflow.config` file should contain rnaseq-nxf as the project id.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second part of the config file (the `google` scope) is specific to Google Cloud. You need to provide the project id (don't provide the project name, it won't work!), and a Google Cloud location (leave it as above if you're not sure of what to put). In the example above, spot instances are also requested (more info about spot instances [here](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/google.html#spot-instances)), which are cheaper instances that, as a drawback, can be reclaimed at any time if resources are needed by the cloud provider. Based on what we have seen so far, the `nextflow.config` file should contain "rnaseq-nxf" as the project id.
```

    input:
    path salmon_index
    tuple val(sample_id), path(reads)

    output:
    path "$sample_id"

    script:
    """
    salmon quant --threads $task.cpus --libType=U -i $salmon_index -1 ${reads[0]} -2 ${reads[1]} -o $sample_id
    """
}

process FASTQC {
    tag "FASTQC on $sample_id"

    input:
    tuple val(sample_id), path(reads)

    output:
    path "fastqc_${sample_id}_logs"

    script:
    """
    mkdir fastqc_${sample_id}_logs
    fastqc -o fastqc_${sample_id}_logs -f fastq -q ${reads}
    """
}

process MULTIQC {
    publishDir params.outdir, mode:'copy'

    input:
    path '*'

    output:
    path 'multiqc_report.html'

    script:
    """
    multiqc .
    """
}

workflow {
    Channel
        .fromFilePairs(params.reads, checkIfExists: true)
        .set { read_pairs_ch }

    index_ch = INDEX(params.transcriptome_file)
    quant_ch = QUANTIFICATION(index_ch, read_pairs_ch)
    fastqc_ch = FASTQC(read_pairs_ch)
    MULTIQC(quant_ch.mix(fastqc_ch).collect())
}

workflow.onComplete {
    log.info ( workflow.success ? "\nDone! Open the following report in your browser --> $params.outdir/multiqc_report.html\n" : "Oops .. something went wrong" )
}
```

> > More information about this pipeline and where this came from can be found in the public training material developed by Seqera Labs at [https://training.seqera.io/](https://training.seqera.io/).

Reviewer 2: I would incorporate this sentence into the paragraph before the code block.

#### Download the input data

> Create a folder named data in your project folder and download the example files (also taken from the Seqera training material).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a folder named `data` in your project folder and download the example files (also taken from the Seqera training material).
```

```bash
$ mkdir data; cd data
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/seqeralabs/nf-training-public/master/nf-training/data/ggal/gut_1.fq
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/seqeralabs/nf-training-public/master/nf-training/data/ggal/gut_2.fq
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/seqeralabs/nf-training-public/master/nf-training/data/ggal/transcriptome.fa
$ cd ..
```

Files can also be uploaded directly to Google Cloud Storage, or downloaded directly from GitHub, depending on your own preferences.

> Use the command below to authenticate the Google Cloud Platform and direct Nextflow to use your account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the command below to authenticate with Google Cloud Platform. Nextflow will use this account by default when you run a pipeline.
```

```bash
$ gcloud auth application-default login
```

> #### Fire! Run the pipeline!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Launch the pipeline!
```

With that done, you’re now ready to run the example Nextflow pipeline. Remember the name of the bucket you created? You will now use it to tell Nextflow here to move our input data and store intermediate and final data. That is, we're setting our work directory with the `-w` parameter.

```bash
$ nextflow run main.nf -w gs://rnaseq-pipeline-bckt/scratch

> ```

Reviewer 2: I suggest you specify the work dir in the config file instead, i.e. `workDir = ...`, to make the final command line as simple as possible.

> 
> It's good practice not to write to the root directory of your bucket. It is better to write to another folder, such as the scratch folder within it. Don't worry about everything being executed remotely in the bucket because the `publishDir` directive was used in the `main.nf` script to direct results into a local folder called `results`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nextflow does not allow you to use the root directory of a bucket as the work directory -- it must be a subdirectory instead. Using a subdirectory is also just a good practice.

While the pipeline stores everything in the bucket, our example pipeline will also download the final outputs to a local directory called `results`, because of how the `publishDir` directive was specified in the `main.nf` script. If you want to avoid the egress cost associated with downloading data from a bucket, you can change the `publishDir` to another bucket directory, e.g. `gs://rnaseq-pipeline-bckt/results`.
```

Reviewer 2: Following up on my previous comment, might want to move the note about the work directory to the config section as well.

> In your command line, you should see something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In your terminal, you should see something like this:
```

![Nextflow ongoing run on Google Cloud Batch](/img/ongoing-nxf-gbatch.png)

> 
> You can open another terminal and check the status of your jobs on Google Batch with the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can check the status of your jobs on Google Batch by opening another terminal and running the following command:
```

```bash
$ gcloud batch jobs list
```

By the end of it, if everything worked well, you should see something like:

![Nextflow run on Google Cloud Batch finished](/img/nxf-gbatch-finished.png)

> And that's it, folks! 😆

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And that's all, folks! 😆
```

Reviewer 2: Not sure if you were going for looney tunes, just in case 😆

Author: 😆 😆 😆 😆 😆

> You will find more information about Nextflow on Google Batch in [this blog post](https://www.nextflow.io/blog/2022/deploy-nextflow-pipelines-with-google-cloud-batch.html), and in [the official documentation of Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/google.html). Don't forget to check [the Google Cloud official docs on running Nextflow pipelines with it](https://cloud.google.com/life-sciences/docs/tutorials/nextflow#gcloud)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will find more information about Nextflow on Google Batch in [this blog post](https://www.nextflow.io/blog/2022/deploy-nextflow-pipelines-with-google-cloud-batch.html) and the [official Nextflow documentation](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/google.html).
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should link to the old Life Sciences tutorial because it might be confusing. The Google bits should still be correct but the Nextflow bits won't be.

Author: So you think we shouldn't mention it at the end, or don't mention it at the beginning either?

Reviewer 2: I don't see the Life Sciences tutorial at the beginning, but yeah I don't think we should mention it at all

Author: Oh, I see now!

> Special thanks to Hatem Nawar and Chris Hakkaart who provided valuable feedback to this document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Special thanks to Hatem Nawar and Chris Hakkaart for providing valuable feedback to this document.
```
